# Data_Lake
Project 4 - Data Engineer

## Table of contents
* [Introduction](#introduction)
* [Project Description](#project_description)
* [Datasets](#datasets)
* [Environment(s)](#environment)
* [Files](#Files)
* [Tables](#tables)
* [Process](#Process)


## Introduction
This project was part of my Udacity Training Degree in Data Engineering. A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, I was tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

* [Project Description](#project_description)
In this project, I applied what I learned of Spark and data lakes to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. To complete the project, I loaded the data from S3, processed the data into analytics tables using Spark, and loaded them back into S3. I used Spark process on a cluster using AWS.

* [Datasets](#datasets)
The datasets consisted of two sets residing in S3:
- **song data**: The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.
- **Log Data**: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

* [Environment(s)](#environment)
For this project we used Jupyter Lab and worked with python files as well as cfg files. 

## Files
- **etl.py** : reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3
- **readme.md** : provide discussion on the process
- **dl.cfg** : contains my AWS credentials

* [Tables](#tables)
As the aim for this project was to create a ETL pipeline for the company to be able to query and analyze songs and user profiles, the schema selected is a star schema. The fact table contains the specific measurables or primary data to be analyzed and it was taken from the log data files:
**Fact Table**
- **songplays** - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong:

songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
- **Dimension Tables**

**users - users in the app**

user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

**songs - songs in music database**

song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

**artists - artists in music database**

artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

**time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units**

start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

Schema of tables:  




* [Process](#Process)
In order to complete the project, I was tasked with extracting Sparkify data from S3, process the data using Spark and load the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables.
After initiating the SparkSession, the processing of the dimensional tables was done by creating a function with the following capabilities:  
- accessing the files 
- reading the files  
- extracting columns to the new tables  
- write the tables to parquet files. Apache Parquet is a columnar storage format and allows for faster query execution compared to row-oriented databases.  




